Units 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 Practice Exam Question and Answer Booklet Duration: 15 minutes reading time, 60 minutes writing time Structure of book: Number of questions Number of questions to be answered Number of marks 10 10 40  Students are permitted to bring into the examination room: pens, pencils, highlighters, erasers and rulers.  Students are not permitted to bring into the examination room: blank sheets of paper and/or white out liquid/tape.  No calculator is allowed in this examination. Materials supplied:  This question and answer booklet of 11 pages, including a sheet of miscellaneous formulas. Instructions:  You must complete al 1 questions of the examination.  Write al 1 your answers in the sp aces provided in this booklet. Foundation§Units 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 The Engage Education Foundation Page 1 6.5 hour revision seminars for ju st $56 – visit www.ee.org. au for more info. Instructions Answer al 1 questions in the spaces provided. In al 1 questions where a numerica 1 answer is requir ed an exact value must be given unless otherwise specified. In questions where more than one mark is available, appropriate working must be shown. Unless otherwise indicated, the diagrams in this book are not drawn to scale. Question 1 Given ݂ሺݖሻൌݖସെ2ݖଷ൅2ݖଶ൅10, and that ݂ሺ2൅݅ሻൌ0, factorize ݂ሺݖሻ over ܥ 4 marks Question 2 Suppose a mass has acceleration a ൌ e୴మ. Find x, the position of the mass, in terms of v, given that xൌ e when vൌ0 . Hint: use an appropriate substi tution to solve the integral. 4 marks The Engage Education Foundation Unit s 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 www. engage education.org.au Page 2 Question 3 a. Find the area enclos ed by the function ݂ሺݔሻൌ ଶ ସା௫మ, the x-axis and the lines ݔൌേ√3 2 marks b. Find an antiderivati ve of the function ݂ሺݔሻൌ௫మ √ଶ௫ିଵ 4 marks Total: 6 marksUnits 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 The Engage Education Foundation Page 3 6.5 hour revision seminars for ju st $56 – visit www.ee.org. au for more info. Question 4 Express sinሺ3θሻെcos ሺ3θሻ as a function of sin ሺθሻ and cos ሺθሻ only. 3 marksThe Engage Education Foundation Unit s 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 www. engage education.org.au Page 4 Question 5 A 10 kg weight is held in stat ic equilibrium by two ropes, ܤܣതതതത and ܥܣതതതത , fixed to a slanted beam, which is attached to a nearby wall, as shown below. a. Show that the line bisecting the angle made by the two ropes at the weight is paralle 1 to the wall. 3 marks b. Hence, or otherwise, find the magnitude of the force exerted by ܤܣതതതത and ܥܣതതതത on the weight. 2 marks Total: 5 marks 10 kg 60˚150˚ AB CUnits 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 The Engage Education Foundation Page 5 6.5 hour revision seminars for ju st $56 – visit www.ee.org. au for more info. Question 6 Sketch the graph of ݕൌଵ ௫൅௫ ଶ൅ଷସ. Include al 1 asymptotes and axes intercepts (do not include turning points). 3 marks x The Engage Education Foundation Unit s 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 www. engage education.org.au Page 6 Question 7 Given ݖൌ2 ݏ݅ܿ ሺగ ଺ሻ, plot: a. ݖ b. ݖଶ c. ݖଷ 3 marks Question 8 Use implicit differentiation to find ௗ௬ ௗ௫ if: ݕݔlog௘ሺݕݔሻ ൌ 1 4 marks Im(z) Re(z) 2 4 8 6 Units 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 The Engage Education Foundation Page 7 6.5 hour revision seminars for ju st $56 – visit www.ee.org. au for more info. Question 9 A particle follows a helica 1 path given by ࢘ሺݐሻൌ 3 cos࢏ ݐ൅3 sin࢐ ݐ൅࢑ݐ a. Find ࢘ሶሺݐ )and ࢘ሷሺݐሻ 2 marks b. Find ࢘ሶሺݐሻ∙࢘ሷሺݐሻ. What does this say about the direction of the particle’s acceleration relative to its velocity? 2 marks Total: 4 marksThe Engage Education Foundation Unit s 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 www. engage education.org.au Page 8 Question 10 Consider an arbitrary quadrilatera 1 ܦܥܤܣ , where vectors ࢉ,࢈,ࢇ and ࢊ are the vectors shown below, and where ܴ,ܳ,ܲ and ܵ are the midpoints of ܤܣതതതത,ܥܤതതതത,ܦܥതതതത and ܣܦതതതത, respectively. Prove, using vector methods , that the quadrilatera 1 ܴܵܳܲ is a parallelogram. 4 marks End of Booklet Looking for solutions? Visit www.engageeducation.org.au/practice-exams ܣ ܤ ܥ ࢇܦ ࢉ࢈ ࢊ Units 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 The Engage Education Foundation Page 9 6.5 hour revision seminars for ju st $56 – visit www.ee.org. au for more info. Formula sheet area of a trapezium 1 2ሺܽ൅ܾሻ݄ curved surface area of a cylinder 2݄ݎߨ volume of a cylinder ݎߨଶ݄ volume of a cone 1 3ݎߨଶ݄ volume of a pyramid 1 3ܣ݄ volume of a sphere 4 3ݎߨଷ area of a triangle 1 2ܾܿsinܣ sine rule ܽ sinܣൌܾ sinܤൌܿ sinܥ cosine rule ܿଶൌܽଶ൅ܾଶെ2ܾܽcosܥ Coordinate geometry ellipse ሺݔെ݄ሻଶ ܽଶ൅ሺݕെ݇ሻଶ ܾଶൌ1 hyperbola ሺݔെ݄ሻଶ ܽଶെሺݕെ݇ሻଶ ܾଶൌ1 Circular (trigonometric) functions cosଶሺݔሻ൅sinଶሺݔሻ ൌ 1 1൅tanଶሺݔሻ ൌ secଶሺݔሻ cotଶሺݔሻ൅1 ൌ cosecଶሺݔሻ sinሺݔ൅ݕሻൌs i nሺݔሻcosሺݕሻ൅cosሺݔሻsinሺݕሻ sinሺݔെݕሻൌs i nሺݔሻcosሺݕሻെcosሺݔሻsin ሺݕሻ cosሺݔ൅ݕሻൌ cosሺݔሻcosሺݕሻെsinሺݔሻsinሺݕሻ cosሺݔെݕሻൌ cosሺݔሻcosሺݕሻ൅sinሺݔሻsin ሺݕሻ tanሺݔ൅ݕሻൌtanሺݔሻ൅tanሺݕሻ 1െtanሺݔሻtanሺݕሻ tanሺݔെݕሻൌtanሺݔሻെtanሺݕሻ 1൅tanሺݔሻtanሺݕሻ cosሺ2ݔሻൌ cosଶሺݔሻെsinଶሺݔሻൌ 2 cosଶሺݔሻെ1ൌ1െ2 sinଶሺݔሻ sinሺ2ݔሻൌ2 s i nሺݔሻcosሺݔሻ tanሺ2ݔሻൌ2 tanሺݔሻ 1െtanଶሺݔሻ function sinିଵcosିଵtanିଵ domain ሾെ1,1ሿ ሾെ1,1ሿ Թ range ቂെߨ 2.ߨ 2ቃ ሾ0,ߨሿ ቀെߨ 2,ߨ 2ቁ The Engage Education Foundation Units 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 www. engage education.org.au Page 10 Algebra (complex numbers) ݖൌݔ൅݅ݕ ൌݎ ሺcosߠ൅݅sinߠ ሻൌݎc i sߠ ݖ௡ൌݎ௡cisሺߠ݊ሻ (de Moivre’s theorem) |ݖ|ൌඥݔଶ൅ݕଶൌݎ െߨ ൏ Argݖ ൑ ߨ ݖଵݖଶൌݎଵݎଶcisሺߠଵ൅ߠଶሻ ݖଵ ݖଶൌݎଵ ݎଶcisሺߠଵെߠଶሻ ݀ ݔ݀ሺݔ௡ሻൌݔ݊ ௡ିଵ නݔ௡ݔ݀ ൌ1 ݊൅1ݔ௡ାଵ൅݊,്ܿെ1 ݀ ݔ݀ሺ݁௔௫ሻൌ݁ܽ ௔௫ න݁௔௫ݔ݀ ൌ1 ܽ݁௔௫൅ܿ ݀ ݔ݀ሺlog௘ݔሻൌ1 ݔ න1 ݔݔ݀ ൌ log ௘|ݔ|൅ܿ ݀ ݔ݀ሺsinሺݔܽሻሻൌ ܽcosሺݔܽሻ නsinሺݔܽሻݔ݀ ൌ െ1 ܽcosሺݔܽሻ൅ܿ ݀ ݔ݀ሺcosሺݔܽሻሻൌെ ܽs i n ሺݔܽሻ නcosሺݔܽሻݔ݀ ൌ1 ܽsinሺݔܽሻ൅ܿ ݀ ݔ݀ሺtanሺݔܽሻሻൌܽ cosଶሺݔܽሻൌܽs e cଶሺݔܽሻ නsecଶሺݔܽሻݔ݀ ൌ1 ܽtanሺݔܽሻ൅ܿ ݀ ݔ݀ሺsinିଵሺݔሻሻൌ1 √1െݔଶ න1 √ܽଶെݔଶݔ݀ ൌ sinିଵቀݔ ܽቁ൅ܽ,ܿ൐0 ݀ ݔ݀ሺcosିଵሺݔሻሻൌെ1 √1െݔଶ නെ1 √ܽଶെݔଶݔ݀ ൌ cosିଵቀݔ ܽቁ൅ܽ,ܿ൐0 ݀ ݔ݀ሺtanିଵሺݔሻሻൌ1 1൅ݔଶ නܽ ܽଶ൅ݔଶݔ݀ ൌ tanିଵቀݔ ܽቁ൅ܿ product rule ݀ ݔ݀ሺݒݑሻൌݒ݀ݑ ݔ݀൅ݑ݀ݒ ݔ݀ quotient rule ݀ ݔ݀ቀݑ ݒቁൌቀݑ݀ݒ ݔ݀െݒ݀ݑ ݔ݀ቁ ݒଶ chain rule ݕ݀ ݔ݀ൌݕ݀ ݑ݀ݑ݀ ݔ݀ Euler’s method If ௗ௬ ௗ௫ൌ݂ሺݔሻ,ݔ଴ൌܽ and ݕ଴ൌܽ ,then ݕ௡ାଵൌݕ௡൅݄݂ሺݔ௡ሻ acceleration ܽൌ݀ଶݔ ݐ݀ଶൌݒ݀ ݐ݀ൌݒ݀ݒ ݔ݀ൌ݀ ݔ݀൬1 2ݒଶ൰ constant (uniform) acceleration ݒൌݑ൅ݐܽ ,ݏൌݐݑ ൅ଵ ଶݐܽଶ, ݒଶൌݑଶ൅2ݏܽ , ݏൌଵ ଶሺݑ൅ݒሻ ݐ Units 3 and 4 Specialist Maths: Exam 1 The Engage Education Foundation Page 11 6.5 hour revision seminars for just $56 – visit www.ee.or g.au for more info. Vectors in two and three dimensions ࢘ൌ࢏ݔ ൅ݕ࢐ ൅࢑ݖ ࢘ൌ࢘݀ ݐ݀ൌݔ݀ ݐ݀࢏൅ݕ݀ ݐ݀࢐൅ݖ݀ ݐ݀ ࢑ |࢘|ൌඥݔଶ൅ݕଶ൅ݖଶൌݎ ࢘ଵ.࢘ଶൌݎଵݎଶcosߠ ൌ ݔ ଵݔଶ൅ݕଵݕଶ൅ݖଵݖଶ momentum ࢖ൌ࢜݉ equation of motion ࡾൌࢇ݉ friction ܨ൑ܰߤ